Strong personal branding is critical to your freelance success.
But having and building a strong stellar portfolio is even more important in landing those first few
portfolios come in a few different flavors and it's nice to have options for your clients.
First of all I can either be a PDA style portfolio an online digital portfolio which functions like
a personal Web site or a portfolio that exists on a third party Web site similar to having a social
media account having at least two out of the three portfolio options and styles is very important.
Many larger clients will sometimes prefer you submit a portfolio in a PDA format while others prefer
a simple link to an online portfolio.
It's nice to be able to have that print or digital PDA option just in case that situation arises.
Also don't ignore that third option of having your portfolio on a third party Web site like Bea Hanscom
where you can build and add your projects.
You have less control over this option but it's great for those who may not want to build an independent
Web site that requires a hosting plan or a domain name no matter which of the formats you choose.
There there's some basic portfolio building basics you should be aware of.
First of all they don't feature too many projects.
You may have a detailed work history or tons of great personal projects that can fill up hundreds of
pages but that doesn't mean you should display every one of them strong portfolios feature a few projects
and present them well with beautifully crafted images and smaller descriptions.
Try featuring three to six strong projects and leave the rest to another link page or blog area.
They have an attention grabbing element.
This can be a strong quote or a previous client testimonial.
This can be a beautifully crafted client project or personal project.
There has to be something that makes your portfolio interesting.
Recently I found the use of video appealing in this situation even for those who are not in motion graphics.
You can craft motion videos easily using free software like I movie are Adobe spark that features and
highlights your work.
We will craft one of these a little bit later in the section.
I know your name and the first five seconds of hearing your portfolio I need to know who you are before
I look at your work.
This could be done by having a strong personal logo or name nearby toward the top of the first page
or home page.
I need to remember your name.
So displaying it in a clever or unique way also helps.
I may view hundreds of portfolios and I need a way to remember you and connect you back to your work.
They feature your personal work not all freelancers have large previous client work in their portfolios
especially when they're first starting out.
Like many of you guys I do enjoy seeing at least one personal work as personal work tends to better
display your passions and your talents than client work does as client work can be limiting they use
simple and clean design elements.
They are less focused on the extra junk and more interested in showing you what matters their work.
They use less photos but make them a little bit larger and easier to see the work they take on and More
magazine design layout style featuring important items that are larger and easy to view.
They show their process.
I love seeing sketches and viewing photos of their raw creative process.
I love viewing behind the scenes photos of them at work.
It just brings a nice personal touch and richness to their work.
There is a man or woman behind your work and it's nice to take a quick peek at that.
This can also be showing your brainstorming process as well with authentic sketches so they can see
that final finished project.
Once again a story driven narrative works really well.
I've had the chance to hire many freelancers in my fourteen year work history.
I've had to survey many portfolios and have come to understand what potential clients are businesses
are looking for and what makes them quickly turn away.
Are some things that turn me off when looking at freelancers portfolios.
First of all they feature projects from several different disciplines.
You arrive on their portfolio to be greeted by projects that seem disjointed such as photography over
here and then an illustration project right next to it.
It's not bad showing off your varied skills but if I'm looking for a photographer I want to see photographer
projects.
It goes back to giving your viewer what they want to see first.
This may mean you feature your other skills elsewhere on your portfolio perhaps in the footer of your
Web site or have two separate portfolios.
One for illustration and one for photography.
I see graphic designers do this all the time.
They'll feature personal photography projects and I'm trying to find a logo designer not someone to
take my photos.
There's always the option of applying a graphic design technique to your own photography making it relevant
to the other pieces in your portfolio.
Some skills connect very well and connect directly.
What other skills are a little less connected.
Also they overwhelm me with Project photos.
Sometimes I arrive on a portfolio and find 10 images on the first screen above the fold when building
a portfolio.
It's best to have a storytelling narrative approach guiding viewers slowly through a well crafted curated
project images or text.
Once again the theme here is less is more try to feature less than five images on the first home page
or viewable portion of the screen.
Obviously there are creative ways to include more and it's project dependent but a rule of thumb is
if you want to feature more than five.
Make sure they're all connected to the same project and not part of different projects.
These are just general guidelines.
They're not hard rules.
I've seen so many portfolios that can break this rule or use multiple photos very well.
Some portfolios are just too long.
I find this mostly with PDL based portfolios.
They're just too long and feature too many projects.
It gets very tiring viewing many many many one projects one after the other.
Another reason to select just three to six strong projects and keeping it at just that.
Another thing I notice on weak portfolios is they do not properly introduce or explain their projects
or work.
I've had to research and hunt down an explanation of what the project is even worse.
A may not even know what they personally contributed to the project.
Did they do the photos and the design.
What role did they play I find having a small narrative or story driving sentences helped to explain
the project.
As I scroll through the project photos nothing too long unless it's imperative to explaining your role
in the project such as a UX UI designer or text and project descriptions sometimes play an even bigger
role than project photos.
And lastly it is try to sell themselves way too hard.
Yes it's a very common thing and they have these strong statements about how they're the only solution
or the best way to go but they just feel like empty statements try to avoid cliché and common phrases
in your headlines or text you want to create unique headlines that are custom to you and echo your unique
approach and your craft.
Remember when we crafted your bio earlier in this class there's several ways to incorporate your bio
in your portfolio.
You can have a separate page or you can sprinkle a little bit about yourself between project photos
on the home page as a creative freelancer.
You have more freedom to express yourself and talk more about your personal goals and passions.
Make sure you show this throughout to drive a sense of authenticity with your portfolio.
I have a great downloadable resource that sums up the last lesson and gives you a few layout tips when
we start to build our online portfolio in later lessons.
We had a chance to review some positive portfolio building qualities we talked about a few of the negative
ones.
Let's start crafting our first portfolio type together.
We're going to go over how to present work in the best way possible highlighting your skills and talents
are going to be doing the PBF style portfolio first so see you in the next lesson.